In this video and the next one
we're gonna dive into yet another important piece
of the Node JS architecture with JS events
and event-driven architecture.
So most of Node's core modules, like the ones
we already used, like HTTP, File System, and Timers
are built around an event-driven architecture,
and we can of course also use this architecture
to our advantage in our own code.
And the concept is actually quite simple.
So, in Node, there are certain objects called
event emitters that emit named events
as soon as something important happens in the app,
like a request hitting server, or a timer expiring,
or a file finishing to read.
These events can then be picked up by event listeners
that we developers set up, which will fire off
callback functions that are attached to each listener, okay.
So again, on one hand, we have event emitters,
and on the other hand event listeners that will react
to emitted events by calling callback function.
Simple, right?
And probably the best way to understand this
is to look at an example.
And so let's briefly understand how Node use
the event-driven architecture to handle server requests
in the HTTP module that we already used in another section.
So when we want to create a server,
we use the Create Server method
and save it to a Server Variable.
This implementation here is a bit different
from what we did before, but it works the exact same way.
Anyway, this server.on method is how we actually
create a listener, and in this case for the "request" event.
So let's say we have our server running,
and a new request is made.
The server acts as an emitter, and will automatically
emit an event called "request" each time that a request
hits the server.
Simple, right?
Then, since we already have a listener set up
for this exact event, the callback function that we attached
to this listener will automatically be called.
And this kind of function we already know from before,
it will simply send some data back to the client.
Now, it works this way because behind the scenes
the server is actually an instance of the Node JS
EventEmitter class, so it inherits all this
event emitting and listening logic from that EventEmitter
class, and don't worry, we're going to use it all
right in the next video, so that you become familiar
with all these logic.
Now, just to finish this lecture, I believe it's
important to mention that this EventEmitter logic
is called the Observer Pattern in Javascript programming
in general, and it's quite a popular pattern with
many used cases.
So the idea is I set there an observer,
in this case the event listener, which keeps waiting,
keeps observing the subject that will eventually
emit the event that the listener is waiting for.
And the opposite of this pattern is simply functions
calling other functions, which is something that
we're more used to actually, right?
But the observer pattern has been designed
to react rather than to call.
And that is because there is a huge benefit of using
this architecture, which is the fact that everything
is more de-coupled.
We don't have, for example, functions from the File System
module calling functions from the HTTP module
because it would be a huge mess.
Instead, these modules are nicely de-coupled
and self-contained, each emitting events that
other functions, even if they come from other modules
can respond to.
Also, using an event-driven architecture makes it
way more straight forward to react multiple times
to the same event.
All we have to do is to set up multiple listeners, right?
Okay and that is Node's event-driven architecture
in a nutshell.
And don't worry if this seems a bit too theoretical,
you will see this logic being used in many situations
throughout the course, starting right in the next video.